## Metadata
* URL: [https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/22/us/emily-oster-school-reopening.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/22/us/emily-oster-school-reopening.html)
* Published Date: 2021-06-22
* Author: [[Dana Goldstein]]

## Highlights
* Indeed, the lack of great choices is one reason the school reopening debate has often been toxic, pitting parents and teachers against each other and one another. White and college-educated parents were more likely to want in-person schooling than working-class parents of color whose families were more likely to contract the virus or die from it, and who had more distrust of schools. Some teachers were eager to stay safe at home, teaching remotely, while others desperately wanted to return to their classrooms.
* It turned out that many educators would not accept a coolly intellectual framework for balancing risk and reward, especially not one advanced from the environs of Brown University. Public schoolteachers had experienced sealed-shut classroom windows and bathrooms without soap. Backed by their unions, they wanted to work safely at home during the pandemic, just as many of their students’ parents were. They had also observed that working-class parents of color were the least likely to beat down classroom doors during the pandemic. When urban schools did reopen, many teachers found themselves standing in front of near-empty classrooms. Dr. Oster had envisioned parents and teachers logging onto school district dashboards, reassured by charts and graphs demonstrating low case rates in schools. But she discovered that data alone would not determine pandemic education policy, nor shape many parents’ choices, at least not in the country’s decentralized, yet highly bureaucratic public school system, rife with labor tensions and stratified by every disparity — race, class, region, politics — that defines American life.