## Metadata
* URL: [https://zettelkasten.de/posts/understanding-hierarchy-translating-folgezettel/](https://zettelkasten.de/posts/understanding-hierarchy-translating-folgezettel/)
* Author: [[sascha]]

## Highlights
* If you use the Folgezettel technique, you achieve two things: 1. You assign each Zettel a place in a hierarchy. 2. You automatically create a connection to the Zettel you create.
* Those two achievements refer to specific principles that are part of the Zettelkasten: Hierarchy and hyper-textuality.
  * **Note**: the two primary structural methodologies of a zettelkasten are hierarchy and hypertextuality
* Luhmann implemented the Folgezettel technique by making use of a certain method to assign unique identifiers (IDs). This results in a hierarchy that consists of the entirety of his Zettelkasten. If we want a hierarchy that covers all of our Zettelkasten we’d just create a Master Structure Zettel. By implementing Luhmann’s Folgezettel technique, you create an enumerated, nested list. Nothing more and nothing less. It can be done by assigning each Zettel the Luhmann Identifier, and it can be done by creating a master Structure Zettel.
* The whole point of the Folgezettel technique was to rob hierarchy from its meaning.
* to be clear, let me tell you that Folgezettel does not mean hierarchy.
* After seeing that, I reviewed how the Folgezettel worked, and then finally understood that it actually meant a direct, obvious connection between notes.
* To make it clear: Both Folgezettel and Structure Zettel are means to remove meaning from position in a hierarchy.
* But there are several important differences: Folgezettel provide unique identifiers. Structure Zettel don’t.
* Structure Zettel and Folgezettel rob hierarchy of its meaning by different means.
* Structure Zettel on the other hand do not introduce one single hierarchy but the possibility of indefinite hierarchies.
  * **Note**: i really appreciate this description of the purpose of Folgezettel and how one might have a preference of Structure Zettel over Folgezettel.
* Why do we introduce hierarchy in the first place? The short answer is: Order.
* Luhmann created order with his Folgezettel to force each Zettel into an unchanging position: Once it is placed, it could not be moved. He externalized the memorization of each position of the Zettel to the system: If each Zettel has an unchanging position, you can refer to it. But you would not have to recall the individual number. You combine entry points (that’s what his register is for) with associations within the Zettelkasten.
  * **Note**: this claim, i think, is controversial but insightful. one problem that physical Zettelkasten solve is the externalization of where to find information. that said, i think some would claim that you must also take into account the role of serendipity in the effectiveness of physical Zettelkasten – when there is some randomness in a system, it can make it more likely that unanticipated connections are made.
* We adhered to this by dividing the ID from the title of the note. The ID represents the eternal position of each Zettel. Its eternity is granted by the nature of time, which our IDs are based on. No moment in time repeats itself.
* But there seems to be something achieved by the Folgezettel technique. After a period of silence on this topic, it re-emerged in the forums driven by the Keyboard Maestro macro by argonsnorts. It is a clever way to combine both IDs. I view it as a need for more order.
* I think Luhmann was already dealing with the problem that he needed more order. He created hubs. For example, he created a Zettel on ideologies that linked to other departments that each dealt with the topic “ideology”.
* After a couple of years with this technique, it evolved quite naturally as I realized what I was actually doing. I gradually enriched those “overview notes” with meaning. I wrote my intentions and goals on top. I added structure to what were merely lists, separated by headings. I wrote texts on them and refactored them into separate Zettel, leaving breadcrumbs to the extracted Zettel where they originated from.
  * **Note**: taking a look at these best practices, it’s important to determine their pros and cons. for example, does writing a purpose at the top of a Structure Note limit your ability to explore new lines of thought?
* Folgezettel cannot serve any of that. They don’t enrich certain link patterns with meaning. The only thing they could establish is a connection. That is the problem with the Folgezettel-Technique.
* Structure Zettel require some understanding about the nature of the connection between the Zettel. The Folgezettel-Technique enables you to postpone the connection.
* Didn’t we hear the same argument quite some time ago? Yes. It is basically: First collect, process later. You have what you have and it is better to have and not need than to need and not have. This is Collector’s Fallacy, which roots in a false sense of accomplishment.
* Example: I have a Structure Zettel that is named Self-Development. It links to a Zettel that is named The concept of the future-self. The Structure Zettel gives me an ordered view of my Zettelkasten as if it was only ordered for the purpose of developing a knowledge structure around the concept of self-development. The Zettel Concept of the future-self is linked because it is one of the core models that map the self in time and space. At the same time, I have a Structure Zettel named Time. What it is about is self-evident. It puts every Zettel in a hierarchy as if my whole Zettelkasten is only designed to create a knowledge structure around the concept of time. The Zettel Concept of the future-self is linked because it is a model that maps the subjective nature of time.
* Luhmann implemented the Folgezettel technique by making use of a certain method to assign unique identifiers (IDs). This results in a hierarchy that consists of the entirety of his Zettelkasten. If we want a hierarchy that covers all of our Zettelkasten we’d just create a Master Structure Zettel. By implementing Luhmann’s Folgezettel technique, you create an enumerated, nested list. Nothing more and nothing less. It can be done by assigning each Zettel the Luhmann Identifier, and it can be done by creating a master Structure Zettel.
* To make it clear: Both Folgezettel and Structure Zettel are means to remove meaning from position in a hierarchy.