## Metadata
* URL: [https://www.popmatters.com/wes-anderson-and-brechtian-dialectics](https://www.popmatters.com/wes-anderson-and-brechtian-dialectics)
* Author: [[G.D. Brown]]

## Highlights
* The precise framing and odd-duck visual charms give way to a fetishization of the 20th Century American bourgeoisie, most apparent in films like 1998’s Rushmore with its portrayal of private-school-precocity, and 2001’s The Royal Tenenbaums with its Salingeresque New York City apartments and intrusive display of high art. This fetishization bares itself in each of Anderson’s films, and French Dispatch is no exception (one of the film’s vignettes centers on an art dealer’s attempts to cash in on a prisoner’s abstract paintings). The aesthetic sensibility of the Anderson catalog is wrought with playful reminders that the film is not just an object, but an object reflective of (or at least aware of) refined taste, presumably, Anderson’s.
* Anderson has faced criticism for his portrayal of largely white, upper-class characters in contrast with the roles of workers and people of color. As the viewer becomes aware of Anderson’s on-screen values, they must, like Brecht, take on the dialectical mindset to best understand the infusion of revolutionary form and bourgeois content, placing Anderson in the context of the neoliberal turn of the last half of the 20th Century.
* Anderson’s synthesis of a revolutionary method of presentation and apparent bourgeois tastes and values, however, sets the director apart as a surprising emblem of the neoliberal era. This does not mean that Anderson is expressly “in on” the broader neoliberal project. In fact, he described Fantastic Mr. Fox as both “anarchic” and “a bit communist” during a 2009 London Film Festival press conference. Rather, the form of his cinematic touch is a reflection of the desire for opulence in the 21st Century United States and the willingness of filmgoers to fall in love with Anderson’s dreamlike worlds, where bourgeois ideas of refinement and taste reign supreme. Perhaps Anderson’s art-filled worlds even gain value in the American cultural zeitgeist as access to such bourgeois refinement falls further from reach for American audiences in the wake of capital crises like the 2008 recession and ongoing upward wealth redistribution.